Rewrite the graphics chapter (#50)
oetiker/lshort: src/graphic.tex

Creating graphical output with \LaTeX{} has a long tradition. It started out
with the \ei{picture} environment which allows you to create graphics by
cleverly placing predefined elements onto the canvas. Unfortunately, this
environment is not very robust and so many alternatives were developed over the
years such as \pai*{metapost}, \pai*{asymptote} or \pai*{xypic}. Today one of
the widely used packages is \pai*{pgf} (short for \enquote{Portable Graphics
  Format}) and its user interface \TikZ{} (short for \enquote{\TikZ{} ist
  \textit{kein} Zeichenprogramm}---German for \enquote{\TikZ{} is \textit{not}
  a drawing program}). This chapter will introduce you to the basic concepts of
writing graphics in \TikZ{}. More detailed tutorials can be found in \pai{pgf}
documentation.

While \TikZ{} is a powerful and versatile language, using it for creating more
complicated graphics may not always be easy. Many packages and libraries build
upon \pai{pgf} foundation to simplify creating specialised diagrams, such as
\pai*{pgfplots} for plotting functions and presenting data or
\pai*{commutative-diagrams} for creating commutative diagrams. It's usually a

> good idea to search CTAN if a specialised package doesn't already solve your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
good idea to search CTAN if a specialised package already solves your
```

problem instead of writing \TikZ{} code from the ground up yourself.

\section{Basic Usage}

> To use \pai{pgf} and \TikZ{} it is sufficient to put the following line in your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use \pai{pgf} and \TikZ{} it is sufficient to put the following line in the
```

preamble:
\begin{minted}{latex}
  \usepackage{tikz}
\end{minted}

> Doing so will provide you with the \ei{tikzpicture} environment and \csi{tikz}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Doing so will provide the \ei{tikzpicture} environment and the \csi{tikz}
```

command, inside of which you can execute \TikZ{} commands. Each \TikZ{} command
is terminated with a semicolon (\verb|;|). The simplest command is the

> \csi{draw} command, which draws points connected by path. Points may be given

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\csi{draw} command, which draws points connected by a path. Points may be given
```

in either Cartesian coordinates \((x, y)\) or polar coordinates
\((\theta\mathpunct{:} r)\), where \(\theta\) is specified in degrees, while
distances are specified in centimetres by default. The path

> between points may be specified in many ways, the simplest of which is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
between points may be specified in many ways, the simplest is
```

\ltx|--|, which draws a straight line.
\begin{example}
\begin{tikzpicture}
  \draw (0, 0)
    -- (15:4)
    -- (0, 2);
\end{tikzpicture}
\tikz{\draw (0, 0) -- (1,1);}
\end{example}

> Oftentimes you will want to close the shape you are drawing. Instead of
> repeating the first point it is better to use \cargv{cycle}. In addition to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you will want to close the shape you are drawing, use \cargv{cycle} instead of repeating the first point. In addition to
```

\section{Curves and Shapes}

So far we have always used \ltx|--| to connect points, however,
this is not the only way. For example, if you wanted to only use horizontal and
vertical lines you could specify \ltx/-|/ or \ltx/|-/ (depending on preferred
order) as connection between points.
\begin{example}
\tikz{\draw (0, 0) |- (2, 1);}
\tikz{\draw (0, 0) -| (2, 1);}
\end{example}

If you want to create curved lines the simplest way is to use \ltx{to} to
connect points. By default it works the same as \ltx{--}, but it can receive
optional argument with \cargv{in} and \cargv{out} keys to define the angle of
connection.
\begin{example}[vertical_mode, examplewidth=0.8\linewidth]
\tikzset{baseline} \vspace{-0.3cm} %!hide
\tikz{\draw (0, 0) to[out=90, in=-90] (2, 0);}
\tikz{\draw (0, 0) to[out=45] (2, 0);}
\vspace{-0.5cm} %!hide
\end{example}
The \cargv{looseness} key may be used to define how much the curve is outstretched.
\begin{example}[vertical_mode, examplewidth=0.8\linewidth]
\tikzset{baseline} \vspace{-1cm} %!hide
\tikz{\draw (0, 0)
  to[out=90, in=-90, looseness=0.5] (2, 0);}
\tikz{\draw (0, 0) 
  to[out=90, in=-90, looseness=2] (2, 0);}
\vspace{-1cm} %!hide
\end{example}

> Often it might be easier to specify the angles relatively using \cargv{bend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often it might be easier to specify relative angles, using the \cargv{bend
```

>   left} and \cargv{bend right} keys. If no angle is provided they will use a
> default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  left} and \cargv{bend right} keys. If no angle is provided a default value is used.
```

  line cap=round]
  (0, 0) -- (1, 1);}
\end{example}
You can also turn them into arrows by specifying \cargv{arrows} key.
\begin{example}
\tikz{\draw[arrows=->]
  (0, 0) -- (1, 1);}
\tikz{\draw[arrows=<<->]
  (0, 0) -- (1, 1);}
\end{example}

The lines don't need to be continuous either. You can specify \cargv{dash
  pattern} or use one of the predefined ones to create dashed paths.
\begin{example}
\tikz{\draw[dash pattern=
  on 4 off 1 on 2 off 1]
  (0, 0) -- (1, 1);}
\tikz{\draw[dotted]
  (0, 0) -- (1, 1);}
\end{example}

You can also adjust how the lines are connected with other lines. For example,
you can pass \cargv{line join} set to \cargv{round}, \cargv{bevel}, or
\cargv{miter}.
\begin{example}
\tikzset{every picture/.style={line width=6pt}} %!hide
\tikz{\draw[line join=round]
  (0, 0) -- (0.5, 1) -- (1, 0);}
\tikz{\draw[line join=bevel]
  (0, 0) -- (0.5, 1) -- (1, 0);}
\end{example}
If you want the line joins to be rounded you can also pass the \cargv{rounded
  corners} key with the value set to the radius of the arc.
\begin{example}
\tikz{\draw[rounded corners]
  (0, 0) -- (0.5, 1) -- (1, 0);}
\tikz{\draw[rounded corners=25]
  (0, 0) -- (0.5, 1) -- (1, 0);}
\end{example}

> Now, let's turn our attention nodes. By default node's boundary is not drawn,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's turn our attention to nodes. By default a node's boundary is not drawn,
```

but you can pass \cargv{draw} and \cargv{fill}, possibly set to a colour, to
reveal it.
\begin{example}
\tikz{\node[draw] (0, 0)
  {Some Text};}
\tikz{\node[fill=red] (0, 0)
  {Some Text};}
\end{example}
As you can see all nodes are rectangles, but they can be changed to circles if
you pass the \cargv{circle} key to their options.
\begin{example}
\tikz{\node[draw, circle]
  (0, 0) {Some text};}
\end{example}

> If you want to input multi line text inside nodes, you have to specify the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to input multi-line text inside nodes, you have to specify the
```

\cargv{align} key; without it new lines will be simply ignored. Possible values
are \cargv{left}, \cargv{center} and \cargv{right}.
\begin{example}
\tikz{\node[draw, align=left]
  (0, 0) {Some more\\ text};}
\tikz{\node[draw, align=center]
  (0, 0) {Even more \\ text};}
\end{example}

When nodes are placed along a path, their position may be adjusted using

> \cargv{anchor} key. Its value is the point of node which should be anchored at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the \cargv{anchor} key. Its value is the point of node which should be anchored at
```

the given point in path.
\begin{example}
\tikz{\draw
  (0, 0) node[anchor=south] {A}
  -- node[anchor=north west] {B}
  (1, 1) node[anchor=135] {C};
}
\end{example}
Usually using relative commands such as \cargv{left} or \cargv{above right} for
this purpose leads to a more readable code, though they are not as powerful.
\begin{example}
\tikz{\draw
  (0, 0) node[above] {A}
  -- node[below right] {B}
  (1, 1) node[right] {C};
}
\end{example}

> All of the options can be obviously freely combined, but the resulting style

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All these options can be freely combined, but the resulting style
```

repeats the drawing command for each value in a provided list, so that you can
only write repeatable code once and only modify the important parts.
\begin{example}[vertical_mode, examplewidth=0.8\linewidth]
\begin{tikzpicture}
  \draw (0, 0) circle[radius=1cm];
  \foreach \i in {0, 60, 120, 180, 240, 300} {
    \draw (0, 0) -- (\i: 1);
    \fill (\i: 1) circle[radius=0.1cm];
  }
\end{tikzpicture}
\end{example}
If your values are a simple arithmetic sequence you can only provide first two
and last value, replacing the rest with triple dots.
\begin{example}[vertical_mode, examplewidth=0.8\linewidth]
\begin{tikzpicture}
  \draw (0, 0) circle[radius=1cm];
  \foreach \i in {0, 20, ..., 340} {
    \draw (0, 0) -- (\i: 1);
    \fill (\i: 1) circle[radius=0.1cm];
  }
\end{tikzpicture}
\end{example}
You can also iterate over pairs by separating respective parts by \ltx{/}.
\begin{example}
\begin{tikzpicture}
  \foreach \i/\j in {0/a,
    1/b, 2/c, 3/d} {
    \node[draw] at (\i, 0) {\j};
  }
\end{tikzpicture}
\end{example}

\section{Libraries}

\pai{pgf} and \TikZ{} do not rely on \LaTeX{}. In fact they can be used with

> any \TeX{} based system or the \TeX{} itself. For this reason \TikZ{} provides

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any \TeX{} based system or even \TeX{} itself. For this reason \TikZ{} provides
```

its own system of extensions that does not use \LaTeX{}'s \cs{usepackage}
command. Extensions of \TikZ{} are called libraries and can be loaded using

> \csi{usetikzlibrary} command which receives a list of comma separated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the \csi{usetikzlibrary} command which receives a list of comma separated
```

    library.}\label{lst:arrows.meta}
\end{listing}
Oftentimes you may want to perform additional computations on existing
coordinates. The \cargv{calc} library allows you to do so by enclosing them
within \verb|$| symbols.
\begin{example}[vertical_mode, examplewidth=0.8\linewidth]
%!showbegin !hide
% In preamble
\usetikzlibrary{calc}
% ...
%!showend !hide

\begin{tikzpicture}
  \coordinate (A) at (1, -1);
  \coordinate (B) at (0, 1);
  \draw[red, ->] (0, 0) -- node[above] {\(A\)} (A);
  \draw[blue, ->] (0, 0) -- node[left] {\(B\)} (B);
  \draw[green, ->] (0, 0) -- 
      node[below right] {\(A+2B\)} ($(A)+2*(B)$);
\end{tikzpicture}
\end{example}

If you have a lot of \TikZ{} code in your document you may notice that
compiling your document takes up much more time than initially. This is because
\TikZ{} redraws each picture with every \LaTeX{} pass. If this starts getting
annoying you can cache your images to external files and reuse them on
subsequent runs. To do this simply put the following code in your preamble.
\begin{minted}{latex}
\usetikzlibrary{external}
\tikzexternalize
\end{minted}
This method has some limitations, but should be sufficient for most uses. Read

> up on it in documentation if problems occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
up on it in the documentation if problems occur.
```
